rosie(1) -- Rosie Pattern Engine (Rosie Pattern Language)
=========================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`rosie` [global-options] command [command-options] pattern-expression [file1 [file2 ...]]

## DESCRIPTION

`Rosie`
searches all given input files for lines that match a pattern.  The pattern
language is similar to regular expressions, but more powerful.  Also, a set of
predefined (named) patterns are provided.  The pattern library is extensible.
Rosie patterns are written in `Rosie Pattern Language (RPL)`.

A shared library, `librosie`, provides a programmatic interface to rosie in C,
Go, Python, and other languages that support `libffi`. `Rosie` can be used for
data mining on large data sets, or for the kind of smaller tasks that Unix
`grep` and other regex tools are used for.  The output can be plain text, like
`grep` produces, or can be structured JSON, in the form of a parse tree.  A
number of other output options are available (see below).

## LANGUAGE REFERENCE

The RPL Language Reference may be found via the
[Rosie home page](http://rosie-lang.org) (news, docs, and more).

## COMMANDS

The primary commands are `match` and `grep`.  Help for a command is obtained using the
`-h` option (see below).  General help is available with the `help` command.

  * `config`:
    Print the configuration of the Rosie installation, including build information if available.

  * `expand` <exp>: 
    Expands a **pattern expression** entered on the command line.  Output is:
	(1) the expression as entered (which will show any shell expansions or
	substitutions); (2) the parsed expression; (3) what the expression means at
	top level, where a bare expression is a tokenized expression; and (4) the
	result after any macro expansions.

  * `grep` <exp> [file1 ...]:
	In the style of grep, match the given **pattern** against lines in the given
	input files (or the standard input).  In this mode, the pattern may match
	anywhere within a line, and all matches within a line are found.  The
	default output form in this mode is to print the entire line for all lines
	that match.

  * `help`:
	Print help text.

  * `list` [name[.name]]:
	List the available patterns from the library whose name matches **name**. To
	list all the names in an imported package, use `list pkgname.*`.

  * `match` <exp> [file1 ...]:
	Match the given **pattern** against lines in the given input files (or the
	standard input). Patterns in RPL begin at the start of the input line. See
	the `grep` command for behavior that is more like that utility.

  * `repl`:
	Enter the read-eval-print loop for interactive development and testing of patterns

  * `test` <file1> [file2...]:
	Execute the unit tests embedded within the listed rpl files.

  * `trace` <exp> [file1 ...]:
	Perform a match, but generate a trace listing of all the steps performed in
	the matching process.  This can be quite a lot of output. 

  * `version`: 
	Print the Rosie version and exit.

## GLOBAL OPTIONS

  * `--colors` <colorspecs>:
	Specify a set of colors and font attributes, each associated with a pattern
	name.  The format of **colorspecs** is a colon-separated list of
	`name=spec`, where:
    
    `spec` is a semi-colon separated list of ANSI (SGR) color and font
	attributes.  Colors may be specified by name or integer code.  Attributes
	include bold, underline, and others.  

	`name` can be `*` for a global default; `pkgname.*` for a package default;
    `localname` to match a name exactly, without a prefix; or
    `pkgname.localname` to match an imported name exactly.

  * `-f, --file` <file>:
	Load a file of rpl code.  This option may be repeated.

  * `--libpath` <paths>:
	Set the rosie **libpath**, which is a colon-separated list of directories to
	search, in order, for imported packages.  The value is a colon-separated
	string.  When the **libpath** is not set by the user, Rosie looks for
	imported packages in the installation directory, at **ROSIE_LIBDIR** (the
	value of which can be seen using the `rosie config` command).

	**Important note:**  If you set the libpath, you must explicitly include the
	standard library if you want Rosie to include the standard library in its
	search. A **libpath** set on the command line takes precedence over one set
	in an initialization file.   

  * `--norcfile`:
	Do not load any initialization file.

  * `-o, --output` <format>:
	Output match data according to **format**, which may be one of:

	color, subs, data, json, line
	
	or possibly other (installation-dependent) values.  Use **rosie help** to
	discover what is available in your installation.  
	
	Note the default output style for the  `match` command is `color`, and for
	the `grep` command, is `line`.

  * `--rcfile` <file>:
	Load the initialization file specified, instead of the default, `~/.rosierc`.

  * `--rpl` <source>:
	Define additional patterns, import additional packages.  The argument passed
	to **--rpl** is typically enclosed in single quotes so that Rosie will see
	it as a single string with no shell expansions performed.

  * `--verbose`:
	When appropriate, output additional information.


## COMMAND OPTIONS

  * `-h, --help`:
	Display help for a command.  This option must be given after the command
	name, e.g. `rosie match -h`.

  * `-a, --all`:
	Generate output for all input lines.  Lines that do not match the
	pattern are written to stderr, while matched output is written to stdout.

  * `-w, --wholefile`:
	Match against the whole input file as if it were a single string.

  * `-F, --fixed-strings`:
	Interpret <pattern> as a set of fixed (literal) strings, instead of an RPL
	pattern (which reqires double quotes around string literals).

  * `-`:
	Stop reading from the given input files, if any, and start reading from the standard input.


## ENVIRONMENT

Currently, Rosie does not use any environment variables.  If this would be a
useful addition, please open an issue on Rosie's GitHub repository to request
this enhancement.


## FILES

  * `~/.rosierc`:
	This is the default initialization file, which is loaded before any command
	line options are processed.  The syntax of a Rosie rcfile is essentially the
	RPL syntax, with two dashes to start comments, and option values in
	double-quoted strings.
   
    Options are set using an assignment-like syntax, e.g.  

	```libpath = "bar:baz"```
   
    to set the rosie `libpath` to a sequence of two directories, `bar` and `baz`.

    The recognized options are:

    `colors`=<colorspec> 
	to set `colors` to a _colorspec_ (can be used multiple times; values will be concatenated)

    `libpath`=<paths> 
	to set `libpath` (can be used multiple times; values will be concatenated)
  
    `loadfile`=<file> 
	to load the specified file (can be used multiple times to load multiple rpl files)

## EXAMPLES

Forthcoming

## BUGS

Rosie does not normalize Unicode input.  If a pattern contains composed
characters, for example, these will not match their decomposed equivalents in
the input (and vice versa).

The RPL compiler is slow (but matching is reasonably fast).

Issues (bugs and enhancement requests) may be found on the
[Rosie issue page](https://github.com/jamiejennings/rosie-pattern-language/issues). 

## SEE ALSO

See [Rosie's home](http://rosie-lang.org) for news, docs, etc.

## AUTHOR

Jamie A. Jennings

With contributions from the people listed in the
[CONTRIBUTORS](https://github.com/jamiejennings/rosie-pattern-language/blob/master/CONTRIBUTORS)
file.

Email the Rosie Project at [info@rosie-lang.org](mailto:info@rosie-lang.org).

Follow [@jamietheriveter](https://twitter.com/jamietheriveter) on Twitter.







